.TH CNTLM 1 "May 2007" "cntlm 0.34" "Accelerating NTLM/NTLMv2 Authentication Proxy"
.SH NAME
\fBcntlm\fP \- authenticating HTTP(S) proxy with TCP/IP tunneling and acceleration

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cntlm
[
.B \-AaBcDdFfgHhiLlPpSsTUuvw
] [ \fIhost1\fP \fIport1\fP | \fIhost1\fP:\fIport1\fP ] ... \fIhostN\fP \fIportN\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBCntlm\fP is an NTLM/NTLMv2 authenticating HTTP proxy. It takes the address of your proxy or proxies
(\fIhost1..N\fP and \fIport1..N\fP) and opens a listening socket, forwarding each request to the parent proxy
(moving in a circular list if the active parent stops working). Along the way, a connection to the parent is
created anew and authenticated or, if available, previously cached connection is reused to achieve higher
efficiency and faster responses.  When the chain is set up, \fBcntlm\fP should be used as a proxy in your
applications. \fBCntlm\fP also integrates transparent TCP/IP port forwarding (tunneling) through the parent
(incl. authentication). Each tunnel opens a new listening socket on the defined local port and forwards all
connections to the given host:port behind the secondary proxy.  Manual page explains how to setup \fBcntlm\fP
properly using configuration file or command\-line arguments.

.PP
\fBCntlm\fP works similarly to NTLMAPS, plus a bucket of new features and without its shortcomings and
inefficiencies. It adds support for real keep\-alive (on both sides) and it caches all authenticated
connections for reuse in subsequent requests. It can be restarted without TIME_WAIT delay, uses just a
fraction of memory compared to NTLMAPS and by orders of magnitude less CPU. Each thread is completely
independent and one cannot block another.  \fBCntlm\fP has many security/privacy features like \fBNTLMv2\fP
support and password protection - it is possible to substitute password hashes (which can be obtained using
\fB\-H\fP) for the actual password or to enter the password interactively. If plaintext password is used, it
is automatically hashed during the startup and all its traces are removed from the process memory.

.PP
In addition to lower usage of system resources, \fBcntlm\fP achieves higher throughput on a given link. By
caching authenticated connections, it acts as an HTTP accelerator; This way, the 5\-way auth handshake for
each connection is transparently eliminated, providing direct access most of the time. NTLMAPS doesn't
authenticate in parallel with the request \- instead, it first connects, sends a probe and disconnects. No
sooner than that it connects again and initiates NTLM handshake. \fBCntlm\fP also doesn't read the whole
request including HTTP body into memory, in fact, no traffic is generated except for the exchange of headers
until the client <\-> server connection is fully negotiated. Only then are the request and response bodies
forwarded, directly between client and server sockets. This way, \fBcntlm\fP avoids most of the TCP/IP
overhead of similar proxies. Along with the fact that \fBcntlm\fP is written in optimized C, it achieves up to
fifteen times faster responses. The slower the line, the more impact \fBcntlm\fP has on download speeds.

.PP
An example of \fBcntlm\fP compared to NTLMAPS under the same conditions: \fBcntlm\fP gave avg 76 kB/s with
peak CPU usage of 0.3% whereas with NTLMAPS it was avg 48 kB/s with peak CPU at 98% (Pentium M 1.8 GHz). The
extreme difference in resource usage is one of many important benefits for laptop use.  Peak memory
consumption (several complex sites, 50 paralell connections/threads; values are in KiB):
.nf
.ft C

       VSZ   RSS CMD
      3204  1436 ./cntlm \-f \-c ./cntlm.conf \-P pid
    411604  6264 /usr/share/ntlmaps/main.py \-c /etc/ntlmaps/server.cfg
.ft P
.fi

.ne 6
.PP
Inherent part of the development is profiling and memory management screening using Valgrind. The source
distribution contains a file called \fIvalgrind.txt\fP, where you can see the report confirming zero leaks, no
access to unallocated memory, no usage of uninitialized data - all tracked down to each CPU instruction
emulated in Valgrind's virtual CPU during a typical production lifetime of the proxy.

.SH OPTIONS
Most options can be pre\-set in a configuration file. Specifying an option more than once is not an error, but
\fBcntlm\fP ignores all occurences except the last one. This does not apply to options like \fB\-L\fP, each of
which creates a new instance of some feature. \fBCntlm\fP can be built with a hardcoded configuration file
(e.g. /etc/cntlm.conf), which is always loaded, if possible.  See \fB\-c\fP option on how to override some or
all of its settings.

.TP 
.B \-A IP/mask\ \ \ \ (Allow)
Allow ACL rule. Together with \fB-D\fP (Deny) they are the two rules allowed in ACL policy. It is more usual
to have this in a configuration file, but \fBCntlm\fP follows the premise that you can do the same on the
command\-line as you can using the config file. When \fBCntlm\fP receives a connection request, it decides
whether to allow or deny it. All ACL rules are stored in a list in the same order as specified. \fBCntlm\fP
then walks the list and the first \fIIP/mask\fP rule that matches the request source address is applied.  The
\fImask\fP can be any number from 0 to 32, where 32 is the default (that is exact IP match). This notation is
also known as CIDR. If you want to match everything, use \fB0/0\fP or an asterix. ACLs on the command\-line
take precedence over those in the config file. In such case, you will see info about that in the log (among
the list of unused options). There you can also see warnings about possibly incorrect subnet spec, that's when
the \fIIP\fP part has more bits than you declare by \fImask\fP (e.g. 10.20.30.40/24 should be 10.20.30.0/24).

.TP 
.B \-a NTLMv2 | NT | NTLM | LM\ \ \ \ (Auth)
Authentication type. NTLM(v2) comprises of one or two hashed responses, NT and LM or NTv2 and LMv2, which are
computed from the password hash. Each response uses a different hashing algorithm; as new response types were
invented, stronger algorithms were used. When you first install \fBcntlm\fP, find the strongest one which
works for you. Each in turn, it's NTLMv2, NT, NTLM and the weakest LM. Very old servers or dedicated HW
proxies might be unable to process anything but LM. If none of those work, see compatibility flags option
\fB\-F\fP. There you can find settings, which should do for even the most obscure proxies. :)

.br
NOTE: Although NTLMv2 is not widely adopted, it is supported on all Windows since NT\ 4.0\ SP4 - for a \fBvery
long time\fP. I strongly suggest that you use it.

When you want to use hashes in the config (instead of plaintext password), each \fBAuth\fP settings requires
different options:
.nf
.ft C

    Settings    |  Requires
    ------------+-----------------
    Auth NTLMv2 |  PassNTLMv2
    Auth NT     |  PassNT
    Auth NTLM   |  PassNT + PassLM
    Auth LM     |  PassLM
.ft P
.fi

.ne 10
.TP
.B \-B\ \ \ \ (NTLMToBasic)
This option enables the "NTLM-to-basic" feature, which allows you to keep your credentials super-secret or to
use one \fBcntlm\fP for multiple users. The basic idea is that you don't have to store the username and the
password in the config file (normally, \fBcntlm\fP won't run without them if you don't enable NTLM-to-basic),
but rather pass it using the widely supported "Basic" proxy authentication scheme (e.g. via the browser's
window). This allows more people to use one \fBcntlm\fP, BUT there is a downside to this: it removes the
convenient "authentication behind the scenes" feature, which normally gives you Internet access without being
bothered by any password dialogs.

.ne 7
IMPORTANT: HTTP protocol obviously has means to negotiate authorization before letting you through, but TCP/IP
doesn't (i.e. open port is open port). If you use NTLM-to-basic and DON'T specify some username/password in
the configuration file, you are bound to loose tunneling features, because \fBcntlm\fP alone won't know your
credentials. If you enable NTLM-to-basic and setup credentials in the configuration for you to be able to use
local tunneling, the proxying feature will work as if it didn't know the password. All users will be prompted
for their personal credentials the first time they try to use the proxy.

Because NTLM identification has at least three parts (username, password, domain) and the basic authentication
provides fields for only two (username, password), you have to smuggle the domain part somewhere. You can set
the \fBDomain\fP config/cmd-line parameter, which will then be used for all users, who don't specify their
domain as a part of the username. To do that and override the global domain setting, use this instead of plain
username in the password dialog: "domain\\username".

.TP 
.B \-c <filename>
Configuration file. Command\-line arguments can be used in combination with this one, overriding config file
values. If no configuration file is specified and \fBcntlm\fP is built with SYSCONFDIR (default), it tries to
load \fIcntlm.conf\fP from that directory. Should you then want to disable its loading, you will have to use
\fB\-c\fP \fI/dev/null\fP on the command\-line to override it.

.TP
.B \-D IP/mask\ \ \ \ (Deny)
Deny ACL rule. See option \fB-A\fP above.

.TP
.B \-d <domain>\ \ \ \ (Domain)
The domain or workgroup of the proxy account. This value can also be specified as a part of the username with
\fB\-u\fP.

.TP
.B \-F <flags>\ \ \ \ (Flags)
NTLM authentication flags. This option is rater delicate and I do not recommend to change the default built-in
values unless you had no success with parent proxy auth and tried all possible values for the \fBAuth\fP
option (\fB\-a\fP). Remember that each NT/LM hash combination requires different flags. This option is sort of
a complete "manual override" and you'll have to deal with every aspect of it yourself. If the parent proxy
refuses to authenticate you, try the following combinations and note that you have to use \fB0x\fP prefix to
use hex numbers:
.nf
.ft C

    1) Auth = nt,   Flags = 0x05820000
    2) Auth = ntlm, Flags = 0x07820000
    3) Auth = lm,   Flags = 0x06820000
.ft P
.fi

.TP
.B \-f
Run in console as a foreground job, do not fork into background. In this mode, all syslog messages will be
echoed to the console (on platforms which support syslog LOG_PERROR option). Though \fBcntlm\fP is primarily
designed as a classic UNIX daemon with syslogd logging, it provides detailed verbose mode without detaching
from the controlling terminal; see \fB-v\fP. In any case, all error and diagnostic messages are always sent to
the system logger.

.ne 6
.TP
.B \-G <pattern>\ \ \ \ (ISAScannerAgent)
User-Agent matching (case insensitive) for trans-isa-scan plugin (see \fB\-S\fP for explanation).  Positive
match identifies requests (applications) for which the plugin should be enabled without considering the size
of the download (see \fB\-S\fP). You can use shell wildcard characters, namely "*", "?" and "[]". If used
without \fB\-S\fP or \fBISAScannerSize\fP, the \fImax_size_in_kb\fP is internally set to infinity, so the
plugin will be active ONLY for selected User-Agents, regardless of download size.

.TP
.B \-g\ \ \ \ (Gateway)
Gateway mode, \fBcntlm\fP listens on all network interfaces. Default is to bind just loopback. That way, only
local processes can connect to \fBcntlm\fP. In the gateway mode though, \fBcntlm\fP listens on all interfaces
and is accessible to other machines on the network. Please note that with this option the command\-line order
matters when specifying proxy or tunnel local (listening) ports. Those positioned before it will bind only
loopback; those after will be public.
.br
IMPORTANT: All of the above applies only to local ports for which you didn't specify any source address. If
you did, \fBcntlm\fP tries to bind the given port only on the specified interface (or rather IP address).

.TP
.B \-H
Use this option to get hashes for password-less configuration. In this mode, \fBcntlm\fP prints the results
and exits. You can just copy & paste right into the config file. You ought to use this option with explicit
\fB\-u\fP and \fB\-d\fP, because some hashes include the username and domain name in the calculation.

.br
NOTE: Some hashes are stronger/better than others, so do NOT use the whole output, just the lines required by
your \fBAuth\fP settings; see \fB\-a\fP for security recommendations about auth setup and hashes.

.TP
.B \-h \fB"<name>: <value>"\fP\ \ \ \ (Header)
Header substitution. Every client's request will be processed and any headers defined using \fB-h\fP or in the
configuration file will be added to it. In case the header is already present, its value will be replaced.

.TP
.B \-i
Interactive password prompt. Any password settings from the command line or config file is ignored with this
option and a password prompt is issued.  Use this option only from shell.

.TP
.B \-L [<saddr>:]<lport>:<rhost>:<rport>\ \ \ \ (Tunnel)
Tunnel specification. The syntax is the same as in OpenSSH's local forwarding (\fB\-L\fP), with a new optional
prefix, \fIsaddr\fP - the source IP address to bind the \fIlport\fP to. \fBCntlm\fP will listen for incomming
connections on the local port \fIlport\fP, forwarding every new connection through the parent proxy to the
\fIrhost\fP:\fIrport\fP (authenticating on the go). This option can be used multiple times for unlimited
number of tunnels, with or without the \fIsaddr\fP option. See \fB-g\fP for the details concerning local port
binding when \fIsaddr\fP is not used.

Please note that many corporate proxies do not allow connections to ports other than 443 (https), but if you
run your target service on this port, you should be safe. Connect to HTTPS is "always" allowed, otherwise
nobody would be able to browse https:// sites. In any case, first try if you can establish a connection
through the tunnel, before you rely on it. This feature does the same job as tools like \fBcorkscrew(1)\fP,
but instead of communicating over a terminal, \fBcntlm\fP keeps it TCP/IP.

.TP
.B \-l [<saddr>:]<lport>\ \ \ \ (Listen)
Local port for the \fBcntlm\fP proxy service. Use the number you have chosen here and the hostname of the
machine running \fBcntlm\fP (possibly localhost) as proxy settings in your browser and/or the environment.
Most applications (including console) support the notion of proxy to connect to other hosts. On POSIX, set the
following variables to use e.g. \fBwget(1)\fP without any trouble (fill in the actual address of \fBcntlm\fP):
.nf
.ft C

    $ export ftp_proxy=http://localhost:3128
    $ export http_proxy=$ftp_proxy
    $ export https_proxy=$ftp_proxy
.ft P
.fi

.ne 6
You can choose to run the proxy service on more than one port, in such case just use this option as many times
as necessary. But unlike tunnel specification, \fBcntlm\fP fails to start if it cannot bind all of the proxy
service ports.  Proxy service port can also be bound selectively. Use \fIsaddr\fP to pick source IP address to
bind the \fIlport\fP to. This allows you, for example, to run the service on different ports for subnet A and
B and make it invisible for subnet C. See \fB-g\fP for the details concerning local port binding when
\fIsaddr\fP is not used.

.TP
.B \-P <pidfile>
Create a PID file \fIpidfile\fP upon startup. If the specified file exists, it is truncated and overwritten.
This option is intended for use with \fBstart\-stop\-daemon(8)\fP and other servicing mechanisms. Please note
that the PID file is created AFTER the process drops its privileges and forks. When the daemon finishes
cleanly, the file is removed.

.TP
.B \-p <password>\ \ \ \ (Password, PassNT, ...)
Proxy account password. \fBCntlm\fP deletes the password from the memory, to make it invisible in /proc or
with inspection tools like \fBps(1)\fP, but the preferable way of specifying password is the configuration
file. To that end, you can use \fBPassword\fP option (for plaintext, human readable format), or "encrypt" your
password via \fB\-H\fP and then use \fBPassNTLMv2\fP, \fBPassNT\fP and/or \fBPassLM\fP.

.TP
.B \-S <max_size_in_kb>\ \ \ \ (ISAScannerSize)
Enables the plugin for transparent handling of the dreaded ISA AV scanner, which returns an interactive HTTP
page (displaying the scanning progress) instead of the file/data you've requested, every time it feels like
scanning the contents.  This presumptuous behavior breaks every automated downloader, updater and basically
EVERY application relying on downloads (e.g. wget, apt-get).

The parameter \fImax_size_in_kb\fP allows you to choose maximum download size you wish to handle by the plugin
(see below why you might want that). If the file size is bigger than this, \fBcntlm\fP forwards you the
interactive page, effectively disabling the plugin for that download. Zero means no limit. Use
\fB\-G\fP/\fBISAScannerAgent\fP to identify applications for which \fImax_size_in_kb\fP should be ignored
(forcing the plugin). It works by matching User-Agent header and is necessary for e.g. wget, apt-get and yum,
which would fail if the response is some HTTP page instead of requested data.

How it works: the client asks for a file, \fBcntlm\fP detects ISA's bullshit response and waits for the secret
link to ISA's cache, which comes no sooner than the file is downloaded and scanned by ISA. Only then can
\fBcntlm\fP make the second request for the real file and forward it along with correct headers to the client.
The client doesn't timeout while waiting for it, b/c \fBcntlm\fP is periodically sending an extra "keepalive"
header, but the user might get nervous not seeing the progress bar move. It's of course \fBpurely
psychological\fP matter, there's no difference if \fBcntlm\fP or your browser requests the scanned file - you
must wait for ISA to do it's job and download then. You just expect to see some progress indicator move, which
is all what the ISA's page does: it shows HTML countdown.

If the plugin cannot parse the page for some reason (different formatting, etc.), it quits and you get the
interactive page - it's never "lost".

.ne 6
The keepalive header is called \fCISA-Scanner\fP and shows ISA's progress, e.g.:
.nf
.ft C

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    ISA-Scanner: 1000 of 10000
    ISA-Scanner: 2000 of 10000
    ...
.ft P
.fi

.TP
.B \-s
Serializes all requests by not using concurrent threads for proxy (tunneling still works in parallel). This
has a horrible impact on performance and is available only for debugging purposes. When used with \fB\-v\fP,
it yields nice sequential debug log, where requests take turns.

.TP
.B \-T <filename>
Used in combination with \fB\-v\fP to save the debug output into a trace file.  It should be placed as the
first parameter on the command line. To prevent data loss, it never overwrites an existing file. You have to
pick a unique name or manually delete the old file.

.TP
.B \-U <uid>
When executed as root, do the stuff that needs such permissions (read config, bind ports, etc.) and then
immediately drop privileges and change to \fIuid\fP.  This parameter can be either number or system username.
If you use a number, both uid and gid of the process will be set to this value; if you specify a username, uid
and gid will be set according to that user's uid and primary gid as defined in \fI/etc/passwd\fP. You should
use the latter, possibly using a dedicated \fBcntlm\fP account. As with any daemon, you are \fBstrongly\fP
advised to run \fBcntlm\fP under a non-privileged account.

.TP
.B \-u <user>[@<domain>]\ \ \ \ (Username)
Proxy account/user name. Domain can be be entered as well.

.TP
.B \-v
Print debugging information. This option enables foreground mode of operation (\fB\-f\fP) for you to be able
to see the output and interact with the program.  In case of any trouble, try to repeat the condition with
this option and attach the whole output to the bug report.

.TP
.B \-w <workstation>\ \ \ \ (Workstation)
Workstation NetBIOS name. Do not use full domain name (FQDN) here. Just the first part. If not specified,
\fBcntlm\fP tries to get the system hostname and if that fails, uses "cntlm" - it's because some proxies
require this field non-empty.

.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration file has the same syntax as OpenSSH ssh_config. It comprises of whitespace delimited keywords
and values. Comment begins with a hash '#' and can begin anywhere in the file. Everything after the hash up
until the EOL is a comment. Values can contain any characters, including whitespace. Do not quote anything.
For detailed explanation of keywords, see appropriate command-line options. Following keywords are available:

.TP
.B Allow <IP>[/<mask>]
ACL allow rule, see \fB-A\fP.

.TP
.B Auth NTLMv2 | NT | NTLM | LM
Select any possible combination of NTLM hashes using a single parameter.

.TP
.B Deny <IP>[/<mask>]
ACL deny rule, see \fB-A\fP.

.TP
.B Domain <domain_name>
Proxy account domain/workgroup name.

.TP
.B Flags <flags>
NTLM authentication flags. See \fB\-F\fP for details.

.TP
.B Gateway yes|no
Gateway mode. In the configuration file, order doesn't matter. Gateway mode
applies the same to all tunnels.

.TP
.B Header <headername: value>
Header substitution. See \fB-h\fP for details and remember, no quoting.

.TP
.B ISAScannerAgent <pattern>
Wildcard-enabled (*, ?, []) case insensitive User-Agent string matching for the trans-isa-plugin. If you don't
define \fBISAScannerSize\fP, it is internally set to infinity, i.e. disabling the plugin for all downloads
except those agent-matched ones. See \fB\-G\fP.

.TP
.B ISAScannerSize <max_size_in_kb>
Enable trans-isa-scan plugin. See \fB\-S\fP for more.

.TP
.B Listen [<saddr>:]<port_number>
Local port number for the \fBcntlm\fP's proxy service. See \fB-l\fP for more.

.TP
.B Password <password>
Proxy account password.

.TP
.B PassNTLMv2, PassNT, PassLM <password>
Hashes of the proxy account password. See \fB\-H\fP and \fB\-a\fP.

.TP
.B Proxy <host:port>
Parent proxy, which requires authentication. The same as proxy on the command\-line, can be used more than
once to specify unlimited number of proxies. Should one proxy fail, \fBcntlm\fP automatically moves on to the
next one. The connect request fails only if the whole list of proxies is scanned and (for each request) and
found to be invalid. Command\-line takes precedence over the configuration file.

.TP
.B NTLMToBasic yes|no
Enable/disable NTLM-to-basic authenticatoin. See \fB-B\fP for more.

.TP
.B Tunnel [<saddr>:]<lport>:<rhost>:<rport>
Tunnel specification. See \fB-L\fP for more.

.TP
.B Username 
Proxy account name, without the possibility to include domain name ('at' sign
is interpreted literally).

.TP
.B Workstation <hostname>
The hostname of your workstation. 

.SH FILES
The optional location of the configuration file is defined in the Makefile, with the default for 1) deb/rpm
package, 2) traditional "make; make install" and 3) Windows installer being:
.nf
.ft C

    1) /etc/cntlm.conf
    2) /usr/local/etc/cntlm.conf
    3) %PROGRAMFILES%\\Cntlm\\cntlm.ini
.ft P
.fi

.SH PORTING
\fBCntlm\fP has been successfully compiled and tested on both little and big endian machines (Linux/i386 and
AIX/PowerPC). For compilation details, see README in the source distribution. Porting to any POSIX conforming
OS shouldn't be more than a matter of the Makefile rearrangement. \fBCntlm\fP uses strictly POSIX.1-2001
interfaces with ISO C99 libc (\fBsnprintf(3)\fP), it is also compliant with SUSv3. Since version 0.33,
\fBcntlm\fP supports Windows using POSIX emulation layer Cygwin.

.SH TODO
In the much needed NTLM-proxy departement, \fBcntlm\fP aims to be a drop\-in replacement for NTLMAPS. But
please note that NTLM WWW auth (that is auth to HTTP servers), when it is running without any parent proxy as
a standalone proxy server in itself, won't probaly be implemented ever. Even though the tasks share common
NTLM authentication, they are different things. Also, I've never seen any access-protected HTTP server
requiring solely NTLM without any alternative. Such a narrow-spectrum tool can be written in Perl in a few
minutes. I strive to keep the code of \fBcntlm\fP simple and efficient.

.SH BUGS
This software is still BETA, so there are probably many bugs for you to uncloak even though I'm testing every
new piece of code AMAP and use \fBcntlm\fP daily.  I'll be happy to fix all of them, but if you can manage,
patches would be better. ;)

\fBTo report a bug\fP, enable the debug output, save it to a file and submit on\-line along with a detailed
description of the problem and how to reproduce it. The link can be found on the homepage.

To generate the debug tracefile correctly, first run \fBcntlm\fP from the shell (command line) and make sure
you can reproduce the bug. When you will have verfied that, stop \fBcntlm\fP (hit Ctrl-C) and insert the
following parameters at the beginning of the command line, preserving their order.  Example:
.nf
.ft C

    cntlm[.exe] \-T cntlmtrace.log \-v \-s ... the rest ...
.ft P
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
Written by David Kubicek <dave (o) awk.cz>
.br
Homepage: http://cntlm.sourceforge.net/

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2007 David Kubicek
.br
\fBCntlm\fP uses DES, MD4, MD5 and HMAC-MD5 routines from gnulib and Base64 routines from \fBmutt(1)\fP.
